=============================================
Nanopb: Protocol Buffers with small code size
=============================================

Nanopb is an ANSI-C library for encoding and decoding messages in Google's `Protocol Buffers`__ format with minimal requirements for RAM and code space.
It is primarily suitable for 32-bit microcontrollers.

__ http://code.google.com/apis/protocolbuffers/

Overall structure
=================

For the runtime program, you always need *pb.h* for type declarations.
Depending on whether you want to encode, decode or both, you also need *pb_encode.h/c* or *pb_decode.h/c*.

The high-level encoding and decoding functions take an array of *pb_field_t* structures, which describes the fields of a message structure. Usually you want these autogenerated from a *.proto* file. The tool string *nanopb_generator.py* accomplishes this.

So a typical project might include these files:

1) Nanopb runtime library:
    - pb.h
    - pb_decode.h and pb_decode.c
    - pb_encode.h and pb_encode.c
2) Protocol description (you can have many):
    - person.proto
    - person.c (autogenerated, contains initializers for const arrays)
    - person.h (autogenerated, contains type declarations)

Features and limitations
========================

**Features**

#) Pure C runtime
#) Small code size (2–10 kB depending on processor)
#) Small ram usage (typically 200 bytes)
#) Allows specifying maximum size for strings and arrays, so that they can be allocated statically.
#) No malloc needed: everything is stored on the stack.
#) You can use either encoder or decoder alone to cut the code size in half.

**Limitations**

#) User must provide callbacks when decoding arrays or strings without maximum size.
#) Some speed has been sacrificed for code size. For example varint calculations are always done in 64 bits.
#) Encoding is focused on writing to streams. For memory buffers only it could be made more efficient.
#) The deprecated Protocol Buffers feature called "groups" is not supported.

Getting started
===============

For starters, consider this simple message::

 message Example {
    required int32 value = 1;
 }

Save this in *example.proto* and run it through *nanopb_generate.py*. You
should now have in *example.h*::

 typedef struct {
    int32_t value;
 } Example;
 
 extern const pb_field_t Example_fields[2];

Now in your main program do this to encode a message::

 Example mymessage = {42};
 uint8_t buffer[10];
 pb_ostream_t stream = pb_ostream_from_buffer(buffer, sizeof(buffer));
 pb_encode(&stream, Example_fields, &mymessage);

After that, buffer will contain the encoded message.
The number of bytes in the message is stored in *stream.bytes_written*.
You can feed the message to *protoc --decode=Example example.proto* to verify its validity.

Library reference
=================

**Encoding**

**Decoding**

**Specifying field options**

**Generated code**

Wishlist
========
#) A specialized encoder for encoding to a memory buffer. Should serialize in reverse order to avoid having to determine submessage size beforehand.
#) A cleaner rewrite of the source generator.
#) Better performance for 16- and 8-bit platforms.
