# API reference: pb_decode.h

Nanopb functionality related to decoding protobuf messages is provided in the [pb_decode.h](../include/nanopb/pb_decode.h) header. It contains the definitions for the decoding context, reading from input streams and decoding the message data into C structures.

The decoding module also handles dynamic memory allocation, if it is enabled by build options.

## Message decoding

### pb_decode

Read and decode all fields of a structure. Reads until EOF on input
stream.

    #define pb_decode(ctx, msgdesc, dest_struct) \
        pb_decode_s(ctx, msgdesc, dest_struct, sizeof(*dest_struct))

|                      |                                                        |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| ctx                  | The `pb_decode_ctx_t` defining the input stream to read from.
| fields               | Message descriptor such as `&MyMessage_msg`, usually autogenerated.
| dest_struct          | Pointer to message structure where data will be stored. Must match the descriptor.
|*returns*             | True on success, false on any [error condition](concepts.md#return-values-and-error-handling).

This is the main function for the decoding process. It will read one protobuf field tag from
the input at a time, find the corresponding field in the descriptor and decode the data into the C structure.

To provide some type safety, the function is implemented as a macro wrapper around `pb_decode_s()`.
The macro uses `sizeof()` to ensure that the size of the structure passed matches the size in the descriptor.
This catches most bugs where a descriptor for wrong message type is accidentally given.

#### Message length
Usually the message length is provided when calling `pb_init_decode_ctx_for_buffer()`.
For callback streams, the length can alternatively be indicated by the callback reporting EOF condition
when it detects end of data from an external source.

In Protocol Buffers binary format, end-of-file is only allowed between fields.
If it happens anywhere else, `pb_decode` will return `false`. On failure return
the structure will have an internally consistent state, but the field contents may be partial.

#### Control flags and field initialization
The decoder behavior can be controlled by modifying [ctx->flags](#pb_decode_ctx_flags_t) before calling it.

By default `pb_decode()` initializes all fields, either to the default value declared in `.proto` or
to a zero value. Setting the context flag `PB_DECODE_CTX_FLAG_NOINIT` skips the initialization.
This can be used for [merging protobuf messages](https://protobuf.dev/programming-guides/encoding/#last-one-wins)
or if you have already initialized the structure.

#### Dynamic allocation
If the [generator options](reference_generator.md) have been used to set fields to `FT_POINTER` type,
this function will allocate storage for them. The allocation will use either the `ctx->allocator` or the default allocator (by default `realloc()`).

For messages containing pointers (those that have [`PB_MSGFLAG_R_HAS_PTRS`](reference_pb_h.md#pb_msgflag_t)), you must call `pb_release()`
to release the allocation after you are done with the structure. On error, `pb_decode()` will call
`pb_release()` before returning `false`.

### pb_decode_s

The actual implementation of the decoding function. Prefer `pb_decode()` macro when possible.
Calling `pb_decode_s()` directly may be necessary if the structure type is not available at the point of code where the call happens.

    bool pb_decode_s(pb_decode_ctx_t *ctx, const pb_msgdesc_t *msgdesc,
                     void *dest_struct, size_t struct_size);

|                      |                                                        |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| ctx                  | The `pb_decode_ctx_t` defining the input stream to read from.
| msgdesc              | Message descriptor such as `&MyMessage_msg`, usually autogenerated.
| dest_struct          | Pointer to message structure where data will be stored. Must match the descriptor.
| struct_size          | Size of `dest_struct`, or `0` to ignore the check.
|*returns*             | True on success, false on any [error condition](concepts.md#return-values-and-error-handling).

## Dynamic memory allocation

### pb_release

Releases all dynamically allocated fields in a message.

    #define pb_release(ctx, msgdesc, dest_struct) ...
    bool pb_release_s(pb_decode_ctx_t *ctx, const pb_msgdesc_t *msgdesc,
                      void *dest_struct, size_t struct_size);

|                      |                                                        |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| ctx                  | The `pb_decode_ctx_t` used for setting the allocator. Can be `NULL`.
| msgdesc              | Message descriptor, usually autogenerated.
| dest_struct          | Pointer to message structure. If `NULL`, function does nothing.
| struct_size          | Size of `dest_struct`, or `0` to ignore the check.
|*returns*             | True on success, false on any [error condition](concepts.md#return-values-and-error-handling).

Similarly to `pb_decode()`, `pb_release()` has a wrapping macro to check the structure size.
The actual implementation is in `pb_release_s()`.

The release function goes through all `FT_POINTER` type fields in the message, releases
the storage associated with them and sets the pointer to `NULL`.
Either the allocator given by `ctx` or the default allocator is used.

If the build option `PB_NO_MALLOC` is defined, this function does nothing.
Similarly if the message descriptor does not have `PB_MSGFLAG_R_HAS_PTRS` or if the `dest_struct` pointer is `NULL`, the function returns `true` without doing anything.

This function is safe to call multiple times, calling it again does nothing.

The release function normally always succeeds.
It can return failure if the message structure is deeper than [maximum nesting depth](reference_buildopt.md#stack-usage-options) or if `struct_size` does not match `msgdesc->struct_size`.

### pb_allocate_field

Allocate or reallocate storage for a single field.

    bool pb_allocate_field(pb_decode_ctx_t *ctx, void **ptr, pb_size_t data_size, pb_size_t array_size);

|                      |                                                        |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| ctx                  | The `pb_decode_ctx_t` used for setting the allocator. Can be `NULL`.
| ptr                  | Pointer to old and new value of the allocation pointer.
| data_size            | Number of bytes per each array item.
| array_size           | Number of items in an array, or 1 for single item.
|*returns*             | True on success, false is size is too large or allocator returns error.

This function either newly allocates memory or changes the size of an existing allocation.
The total allocation size is `data_size * array_size`, but this function internally checks for overflow in the multiplication.

This function uses either the default allocator, or the allocator defined by `ctx->allocator`.

The initial value of `*ptr` should be `NULL` if there is no previous allocation.
Otherwise the previous allocation is resized using `realloc()`, which may also change the value of `*ptr`.

On allocation failure, false is returned and `*ptr` remains unchanged.

Example usage:

    typedef struct MyMessage {
        pb_size_t myarray_count;
        int32_t *myarray;
    } MyMessage;

    MyMessage msg = MyMessage_init_zero;
    msg.myarray_count = 10;

    if (!pb_allocate_field(ctx, &msg.myarray, sizeof(int32_t), msg.myarray_count))
        return false;

### pb_release_field

Release storage previously allocated by `pb_allocate_field()`.

    void pb_release_field(pb_decode_ctx_t *ctx, void *ptr);

|                      |                                                        |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| ctx                  | The `pb_decode_ctx_t` used for setting the allocator. Can be `NULL`.
| ptr                  | Pointer to memory allocation to be released.

This function uses either the default allocator, or the allocator defined by `ctx->allocator`.

## Input stream management

Protobuf data to be decoded is read from an input stream, which can be either a memory buffer or a custom callback function. It is possible to decode messages larger than the available RAM if you provide a stream callback function that directly reads from some external communication interface.

### pb_decode_ctx_t

The decode context contains the input stream definition and other data associated with the decoding process.
Use one of [`pb_init_decode_ctx_*`](#pb_init_decode_ctx_for_buffer) functions to initialize it.

    struct pb_decode_ctx_s
    {
        pb_decode_ctx_flags_t flags;

        pb_size_t bytes_left;
        const pb_byte_t *rdpos;

        pb_walk_state_t *walk_state;

        pb_decode_ctx_read_callback_t stream_callback;
        void *stream_callback_state;
        pb_byte_t *buffer;
        pb_size_t buffer_size;

        const char *errmsg;

        pb_allocator_t *allocator;

        pb_decode_ctx_field_callback_t field_callback;
        void *field_callback_state;
    };

#### pb_decode_ctx_flags_t

Decoding context flags control the behavior of stream output and decoding functions.
They can be set by user before calling `pb_decode()`.

|                                      |                                                        |
|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| `PB_DECODE_CTX_FLAG_NOINIT`          | Do not initialize fields before decoding. Any fields not present in input data retain their previous values in the structure.
| `PB_DECODE_CTX_FLAG_DELIMITED`       | Read varint length before the message. Corresponds to `parseDelimitedFrom()` in Google's protobuf API.
| `PB_DECODE_CTX_FLAG_NO_VALIDATE_UTF8`| By default strings are validated to be UTF-8 encoded data. This flag disables the validation. Alternatively `PB_NO_VALIDATE_UTF8` build option can disable it globally.

#### Stream bytes_left and read position

The `bytes_left` is an upper bound on the remaining bytes in the stream.
For the top-level stream with memory buffers it is the total length of the input message.
For submessages, nanopb will temporarily set `bytes_left` to the length of the submessage data.
For callback streams, the callback function can indicate end of message before `bytes_left` has reached `0`.

For memory buffers, the `rdpos` pointer is the current read position in the buffer.
For callback streams it can be either `NULL` or point to a temporary input buffer.

#### Walk state

The `walk_state` field is internally set by the first `pb_decode()` call.
It is used to share the `pb_walk()` stack when user callbacks recursively call `pb_decode()`.

#### Stream callback

The stream callback is a user-provided function, which reads data from some external communication
interface such as network, serial port or filesystem. Nanopb will then decode this data.

    pb_size_t my_stream_read_callback(pb_decode_ctx_t *ctx, pb_byte_t *buf, pb_size_t count);

The callback should read up to `count` bytes into `buf` from the external source, and return the number of bytes read.
Value of `count` is always smaller than `PB_SIZE_MAX` and at most `ctx->bytes_left`.
Any return value less than `count` is interpreted as end-of-stream.

On errors, return `PB_READ_ERROR`. This will cause decoding to abort.
You can optionally set `ctx->errmsg` using `PB_SET_ERROR()`.
Otherwise `pb_read()` will set it to `"io error"`.

The callback can use `stream_callback_state` member variable to store your own data.
Alternatively you can [extend the structure](concepts.md#extensible-structures) to add your own fields.

The context variables such as `bytes_left` are updated by `pb_read()` after the callback returns.

There is an example of a custom stream callback in [examples/network_server/common.c](../examples/network_server/common.c).

#### Error message

The primary status indication is the `bool` return value for success or failure.
There is an [optional error message](concepts.md#return-values-and-error-handling) in the `ctx->errmsg`, but this is for debugging purposes only and can be disabled with the `PB_NO_ERRMSG` build option.

#### Field callback

Nanopb uses [field callbacks](concepts.md#field-callbacks) to handle message fields with unknown or large size.
The callback function is provided by user code and decodes data directly from the input stream.

The `field_callback` function specified in the decoding context receives a call for each field that has `FT_CALLBACK` type. It can read data using the [manual decoding functions](#manual-field-decoding).
The callback should return `false` on errors, which will terminate the decoding process.

The field tag has already been decoded before the callback is called, and the `ctx->bytes_left` is set to the payload length of the field.

The context field callback is also called for any unknown fields which are not present in the descriptor generated from `.proto` file. For unknown fields, the field tag is available in `field->tag` as normal, and `field->type` is set to a `PB_LTYPE` value corresponding to the wire type, but other values such `field->pData` are just zeroed.
The callback can simply return `true` for any fields it doesn't know, and nanopb will discard the field data.

The callback can use `ctx->field_callback_state` member variable to store your own data.
Alternatively you can [extend the structure](concepts.md#extensible-structures) to add your own fields.

The data in the C structure can be written using pointers in `pb_field_iter_t`.
The callback can determine which field is being decoded by comparing `field->descriptor` and `field->tag`.
For example:

    bool my_field_callback(pb_decode_ctx_t *ctx, const pb_field_iter_t *field)
    {
        if (field->descriptor == &SubMessage_msg && field->tag == SubMessage_stringvalue_tag)
        {
            // Decode our callback field
            uint64_t value;
            if (!pb_decode_varint(ctx, &value))
                return false;

            printf("Value: %d\n", (int)value);
            return true;
        }

        // Unknown field, just skip it
        return true;
    }

    ....

    pb_decode_ctx_t ctx;
    pb_init_decode_ctx_for_buffer(&ctx, ...);
    ctx.field_callback = &my_field_callback;


### pb_init_decode_ctx_for_buffer

Initializes an encoding context for reading from a memory buffer.
The length of the message data must be known beforehand.

    void pb_init_decode_ctx_for_buffer(pb_decode_ctx_t *ctx, const pb_byte_t *buf, pb_size_t msglen);

|                      |                                                        |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| ctx                  | Pointer to the context to be initialized.
| buf                  | Memory buffer containing the message data
| msglen               | Length of the incoming message.

> [!NOTE]
> `msglen` is not the length of the buffer, it must be the length of actual message data.
> Protobuf messages contain no indication of where the message ends, so the length must be known
> by other means.

### pb_init_decode_ctx_for_callback

Initializes an encoding context for passing data to a custom callback function.

    void pb_init_decode_ctx_for_callback(pb_decode_ctx_t *ctx,
        pb_decode_ctx_read_callback_t stream_callback, void *stream_callback_state,
        pb_size_t max_msglen, pb_byte_t *buf, pb_size_t bufsize);

|                      |                                                        |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| ctx                  | Pointer to the context to be initialized.
| stream_callback      | Custom [stream callback function](#stream-callback)
| stream_callback_state| Free value that is stored into `ctx->stream_callback_state` or `NULL`
| max_msglen           | Maximum number of bytes to read before end-of-stream
| buf                  | Temporary buffer or `NULL`
| bufsize              | Size of the temporary buffer or `0`

Providing a temporary buffer is optional.
If provided, it is used to coalesce read requests so that a larger amount of data
can be read in one IO operation.
It is also used as a read-ahead buffer for optimizing memory allocation
sizes when dynamic allocation is used.

The `max_msglen` is an upper bound for the message size.
The callback can indicate end-of-stream earlier by its return value.
It is recommended to set a reasonable maximum length to avoid denial-of-service through
excessively long input messages from e.g. a network socket.

Maximum possible length for callback stream is `PB_SIZE_MAX - 1`, because the highest value
is reserved for `PB_READ_ERROR`. This initialization function automatically limits the `max_msglen` value.

### pb_read

Read raw data from input stream.

    bool pb_read(pb_decode_ctx_t *ctx, pb_byte_t *buf, pb_size_t count);

|                      |                                                        |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| ctx                  | Input stream to read from.
| buf                  | Buffer to store the data to, or `NULL` to discard data without storing it anywhere.
| count                | Number of bytes to read.
|*returns*             | True on success, false if `stream->bytes_left` is less than `count` or if an IO error occurs.

End of stream is signalled by `stream->bytes_left` being zero after `pb_read()` returns false.

For callback streams, any data in the temporary buffer is returned first, and the stream callback is called for any remaining requested `count`. The `pb_read()` call never puts data into the temporary buffer. The buffer is only filled internally at points where the remaining length of a protobuf element is known.

## Manual field decoding

The functions with names `pb_decode_<datatype>` are used for decoding single fields manually.
Typically this is used when writing custom [field callbacks](concepts.md#field-callbacks), but it can also be used for fully manual control over the decoding process.

For callback fields, the field tag is decoded by nanopb before the callback function is called.
For fully manual decoding, `pb_decode_tag()` can be used to read the field identifier, after which the field data can be decoded.

To decode numeric (including enumerated and boolean) values, use
[pb_decode_varint](#pb_decode_varint), [pb_decode_svarint](#pb_decode_svarint),
[pb_decode_fixed32](#pb_decode_fixed32) and [pb_decode_fixed64](#pb_decode_fixed64).
They take a pointer to a 32- or 64-bit C variable, which you may then cast to smaller datatype for storage.

For decoding strings and bytes fields, the length has already been decoded and the callback function is given a length-limited substream.
You can therefore check the total length in `stream->bytes_left` and read the data using [pb_read](#pb_read).

Finally, for decoding submessages in a callback, use `pb_decode()` and pass it the submessage message descriptor.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> See [Google Protobuf Encoding Format Documentation](https://protobuf.dev/programming-guides/encoding/) for background information on the Protobuf wire format.

### pb_decode_tag

Decode the tag that comes before each field in the protobuf format:

    bool pb_decode_tag(pb_decode_ctx_t *stream, pb_wire_type_t *wire_type, pb_tag_t *tag, bool *eof);

|                      |                                                        |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| ctx                  | Input stream to read from.
| wire_type            | Pointer to variable where to store the wire type of the field.
| tag                  | Pointer to variable where to store the tag of the field.
| eof                  | Pointer to variable where to store end-of-file status.
|*returns*             | True on success, false on error or EOF.

When the message (stream) ends, this function will return `false` and set
`eof` to true. On other errors, `eof` will be set to false.

### pb_skip_field

Discard the data for a field from the stream, without actually decoding it:

    bool pb_skip_field(pb_decode_ctx_t *stream, pb_wire_type_t wire_type);

|                      |                                                        |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| ctx                  | Input stream to read from.
| wire_type            | Type of field to skip.
|*returns*             | True on success, false on IO error.

This function determines the amount of bytes to read based on the wire type.
For `PB_WT_STRING`, it will read the length prefix of a string or submessage
to determine its length.

### pb_decode_varint

Read and decode a [varint](http://code.google.com/apis/protocolbuffers/docs/encoding.html#varints)
encoded integer.

    bool pb_decode_varint(pb_decode_ctx_t *stream, uint64_t *dest);

|                      |                                                        |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| ctx                  | Input stream to read from. 1-10 bytes will be read.
| dest                 | Storage for the decoded integer. Value is undefined on error.
|*returns*             | True on success, false if value exceeds uint64_t range or an IO error happens.

### pb_decode_varint32

Same as `pb_decode_varint`, but limits the value to 32 bits:

    bool pb_decode_varint32(pb_decode_ctx_t *stream, uint32_t *dest);

Parameters are the same as `pb_decode_varint`. This function can be used
for decoding lengths and other commonly occurring elements that you know
shouldn't be larger than 32 bit. It will return an error if the value
exceeds the `uint32_t` datatype.

### pb_decode_bool

Same as `pb_decode_varint`, but converts value to boolean.

    bool pb_decode_bool(pb_decode_ctx_t *ctx, bool *dest);

Any non-zero value is regarded as `true`.

### pb_decode_svarint

Similar to `pb_decode_varint`, except that it
performs zigzag-decoding on the value. This corresponds to the Protocol
Buffers `sint32` and `sint64` datatypes. :

    bool pb_decode_svarint(pb_decode_ctx_t *stream, int64_t *dest);

(parameters are the same as `pb_decode_varint`)

### pb_decode_fixed32

Decode a `fixed32`, `sfixed32` or `float` value.

    bool pb_decode_fixed32(pb_decode_ctx_t *stream, void *dest);

|                      |                                                        |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| ctx                  | Input stream to read from. 4 bytes will be read.
| dest                 | Pointer to destination `int32_t`, `uint32_t` or `float`.
|*returns*             | True on success, false on IO errors.

This function reads 4 bytes from the input stream. On big endian
architectures, it then reverses the order of the bytes. Finally, it
writes the bytes to `dest`.

### pb_decode_fixed64

Decode a `fixed64`, `sfixed64` or `double` value. :

    bool pb_decode_fixed64(pb_decode_ctx_t *stream, void *dest);

|                      |                                                        |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| ctx                  | Input stream to read from. 8 bytes will be read.
| dest                 | Pointer to destination `int64_t`, `uint64_t` or `double`.
|*returns*             | True on success, false on IO errors.

Same as [pb_decode_fixed32](#pb_decode_fixed32), except this reads 8
bytes.

### pb_decode_double_as_float

Decodes a 64-bit `double` value into a 32-bit `float` variable.
This is sometimes needed when platforms like AVR that do not support 64-bit
`double` need to communicate using a message type that contains `double` fields.
Counterpart of `pb_encode_float_as_double()`.

    bool pb_decode_double_as_float(pb_decode_ctx_t *stream, float *dest);

|                      |                                                        |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| ctx                  | Input stream to read from. 8 bytes will be read.
| dest                 | Pointer to destination *float*.
|*returns*             | True on success, false on IO errors.

This function is only included if `PB_CONVERT_DOUBLE_FLOAT` build option is set.

### pb_decode_open_substream

Decode the length for a field with wire type `PB_WT_STRING` and open
a length-limited substream for reading the data.

    bool pb_decode_open_substream(pb_decode_ctx_t *ctx, pb_size_t *old_length);

|                      |                                                        |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| ctx                  | Decoding context to read from and to set the length of.
| old_length           | Temporary storage for storing the original length.
|*returns*             | True on success, false if reading the length fails.

This function uses `pb_decode_varint` to read an integer from the stream, which is the length of the `STRING` type protobuf element.
The value is first compared against the remaining `bytes_left`, and if not enough data is remaining, error is returned.
Otherwise `ctx->bytes_left` is set to the data length.

The remaining length in original stream after the read is stored into `old_length` for restoring.

### pb_decode_close_substream

Close the substream opened with `pb_decode_open_substream()`

    bool pb_decode_close_substream(pb_decode_ctx_t *ctx, pb_size_t old_length)

|                      |                                                        |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| ctx                  | Decoding context to restore the length of.
| old_length           | The length value stored by `pb_decode_open_substream()`.

This function discards any remaining data in the substream and then restores `bytes_left` to `old_length`.
