# pb_common.h

The `pb_common` module contains shared support functions that are used by both `pb_decode.c` and `pb_encode.c`.

User code rarely calls these functions directly, but they can be used for a limited kind of reflection
over the field information stored in the message descriptors.

## Message descriptor handling

Nanopb stores information about each field in the protobuf messages in a compact representation.
The data is written by the generator and the `PB_BIND()` macro and is stored in a `pb_msgdesc_t` structure.
The functions shown below access this data and provide data for each field as a `pb_field_iter_t`.

### pb_field_iter_begin

Begins iterating over the fields in a message type:

    bool pb_field_iter_begin(pb_field_iter_t *iter, const pb_msgdesc_t *msgdesc, void *message);

|                      |                                                        |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| iter                 | Pointer to the iterator to be initialized
| msgdesc              | Autogenerated message descriptor
| message              | Pointer to message structure
|*returns*             | True on success, false if the message type has no fields

After successful return, the iterator contains the data for the first field in the message.
See [pb_field_iter_t](reference_pb_h.md#pb_field_iter_t) in pb.h for definition of the iterator.

### pb_field_iter_next

Advance to the next field in the message:

    bool pb_field_iter_next(pb_field_iter_t *iter);

|                      |                                                        |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| iter                 | Pointer to iterator previously initialized by `pb_field_iter_begin()`
|*returns*             | True on success, false after last field in the message.

When the last field in the message has been processed, this function
will return false and initialize `iter` back to the first field in the
message.

### pb_field_iter_find

Find a field specified by tag number in the message:

    bool pb_field_iter_find(pb_field_iter_t *iter, pb_tag_t tag, pb_extension_t **ext);

|                      |                                                        |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| iter                 | Pointer to iterator previously initialized by `pb_field_iter_begin()`
| tag                  | Tag number to search for
| ext                  | `NULL`, or pointer to a `pb_extension_t *` that will be set to a found extension field
|*returns*             | True if field was found, false otherwise

This function is functionally identical to calling `pb_field_iter_next()` until `iter.tag` equals the searched value. Internally this function avoids fully processing the descriptor for intermediate fields.

If `ext` parameter is given and no match was found in normal fields, the function searches for a matching [extension field](https://protobuf.dev/programming-guides/extension_declarations/). If such is found, `iter` will point to the field with `PB_LTYPE_EXTENSION` and `*ext` will point to the `pb_extension_t` matching the tag.

### pb_field_iter_load_extension

Load field iterator values from an extension:

    bool pb_field_iter_load_extension(pb_field_iter_t *iter, pb_extension_t *extension);

This function temporarily sets the values in `iter` to match the first (and only) field in the extension.
The field can then be processed as normal, and next call to `pb_field_iter_next()` will restart from the beginning of the original message.

### pb_get_extension_data_ptr

Returns a pointer to the data for an extension.

    void *pb_get_extension_data_ptr(pb_extension_t *extension);

For fields with `PB_ATYPE_POINTER`, this returns `&extension->dest`, as the payload pointer is directly stored in the extension structure. This avoids unnecessary extra indirection.

For other field types, this returns `extension->dest`, which points to the data payload.

### pb_ltype_to_wire_type

Returns the [wire type](https://protobuf.dev/programming-guides/encoding/#structure) in protobuf encoding which corresponds to the field `pb_type_t`:

    pb_wire_type_t pb_ltype_to_wire_type(pb_type_t type);

Returns `PB_WT_VARINT`, `PB_WT_32BIT`, `PB_WT_64BIT`, `PB_WT_STRING` or `PB_WT_INVALID`.

Note that for fields with ltype less than `PB_LTYPE_LAST_PACKABLE`, `PB_WT_STRING` is also a valid wire type.

## Message hierarchy processing

Protobuf messages and their submessages form a tree-like structure.
Both encoding and decoding processes need to walk this tree.

Using C recursion for processing the hierarchy increases stack usage,
as each level will save return addresses and other runtime information
on the stack.

The `pb_walk()` implements the [visitor design pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visitor_pattern), where a callback function is called for each field.
The return value then determines whether the processing descends into the submessage or proceeds to next field.

For each message level, minimum amount of information is stored, such as the descriptor and field index of the parent message. A statically sized buffer for up to `PB_MESSAGE_NESTING` levels is allocated on the stack. Unless recursion is disabled with `PB_NO_RECURSION`, `pb_walk()` will automatically call itself to obtain more stack space if the hierarchy is deeper. See [stack usage options](reference_buildopt.md#stack-usage-options) for details.

A simplified sequence could be like this:

1. Initialization:
   * `pb_encode()` calls `pb_walk_init()` and provides the message descriptor
   * `pb_encode()` calls `pb_walk()`
2. Top level message processing:
   * `pb_walk()` calls `pb_encode_walk_cb()` with `state->iter` pointing to the first field in the top-level message
   * `pb_encode_walk_cb()` determines that the field is a submessage, encodes the tag and returns `PB_WALK_IN`
3. Submessage processing:
   * `pb_walk()` stores stack frame and calls `pb_encode_walk_cb()` with the first field in the submessage
   * `pb_encode_walk_cb()` encodes the submessage field tag and data and returns `PB_WALK_OUT`
   * `pb_walk()` restores stack frame and calls `pb_encode_walk_cb()` with the first field in the top-level message
4. Return to top level message processing:
   * `pb_encode_walk_cb()` detects `state->retval == PB_WALK_OUT` and returns `PB_WALK_NEXT_ITEM`
   *  `pb_walk()` advances the iterator and notices this was the last field. It calls `pb_encode_walk_cb()` with tag 0.
5. End of message:
   * `pb_encode_walk_cb()` detects tag 0 as a marker of end of message and returns `PB_WALK_OUT`.
   * `pb_walk()` notices it is on top level and exits with success.

### pb_walk_retval_t

Return value from the user callback, indicates the action `pb_walk()` should take next.

* **PB_WALK_EXIT_OK**: Return from `pb_walk()` with `true` status.
* **PB_WALK_EXIT_ERR**: Return from `pb_walk()` with `false` status.
* **PB_WALK_IN**: Descend into a submessage and invoke the callback on its first field.
* **PB_WALK_OUT**: Return from a submessage and invoke the callback on the field it was on before `PB_WALK_IN`.
* **PB_WALK_NEXT_ITEM**: If the field is an array or an extension, go to the next item in it. Otherwise go to the next field.
* **PB_WALK_NEXT_FIELD**: Go to the next field. At the end of the message, `iter.tag` is set to 0.

### pb_walk_state_t

The state of the walking operation is stored in this structure.
The `pb_encode_submessage()` and `pb_decode()` functions attempt to reuse the same state if they are recursively called from a user-provided field callback.

    typedef struct pb_walk_state_s pb_walk_state_t;
    struct pb_walk_state_s {
        pb_field_iter_t iter;
        pb_walk_cb_t callback;

        void *stack;
        pb_walk_stacksize_t stacksize;
        pb_walk_stacksize_t stack_remain;
        pb_walk_stacksize_t next_stacksize;

        void *ctx;
        uint32_t flags;

        pb_fieldidx_t depth;
        pb_fieldidx_t max_depth;

        pb_walk_retval_t retval;

        const char *errmsg;
    };

#### Field iterator

The `iter` member contains a field iterator for the field that is currently being processed.
The user-provided walk `callback` function can use and advance the iterator.

When the callback returns, `pb_walk()` continues from where the callback left the iterator.

#### Stack management

The `stack` is a pointer to a memory buffer where information for each message level is stored.
It is used as a full-descending stack: the initial value points to the end of the buffer, and it is decremented for each level.

The user code can request storage for the callback by setting `next_stacksize`, which can be modified for each level.
The callback can check how much stack space it has available by checking `stacksize`, which it shouldn't modify.

The remaining stack is tracked by `stack_remain`, which is automatically updated by `pb_walk()`.

#### Callback context and flags

The `ctx` and `flags` variables are for free use by the walk callback implementation, they are
not used by the `pb_walk()` code.

Typically the `ctx` will store either `pb_encode_ctx_t` or `pb_decode_ctx_t`.

The flags can be used to convey information between message levels, such as "this is the first field in a submessage".

#### Depth limit

The `depth` and `max_depth` variables track the level in the hierarchy.
The `depth` is automatically updated by `pb_walk()`, and an error is returned if it exceeds `max_depth`.

User code is allowed to increment and decrement `depth` if it performs recursive actions that are not
visible to `pb_walk()`. The only special value is `0`, at which level `pb_walk()` will return with success.

#### Return value and error message

The `retval` stores the latest return value from the walk callback.
This can be read by the next call, to determine what was the previous action taken.
Typically it is used to advance into next field after a `PB_WALK_OUT` return from a submessage.

The `errmsg` is used for storing informative [error messages](concepts.md#return-values-and-error-handling) for error conditions inside `pb_walk()`. The caller can combine this information with the `ctx->errmsg`.

### pb_walk_init

This function initializes the state for the walking operation.

    bool pb_walk_init(pb_walk_state_t *state, const pb_msgdesc_t *msgdesc,
        const void *message, pb_walk_cb_t callback);

|               |                                                         |
|---------------|---------------------------------------------------------|
| state         | State structure to initialize
| msgdesc       | Message descriptor of the structure to walk
| message       | Pointer to the C structure corresponding to the descriptor
| callback      | Callback function to invoke for each message field
|*returns*      | True on success, false for empty message types.

After the initialization, caller can modify `state` to set e.g. initial stack
allocation, the `ctx` or the `flags`.

### pb_walk

Iterate over the message hierarchy until the callback returns an exit value.

    bool pb_walk(pb_walk_state_t *state);

|               |                                                         |
|---------------|---------------------------------------------------------|
| state         | State structure previously initialized with `pb_walk_init()`
| *returns*     | True on success, false if callback returned `PB_WALK_EXIT_ERR`

The walk callback is repeatedly called, and iterator is moved according to the return value.

If the callback returns `PB_WALK_IN`, then `pb_walk()` stores information of current
iterator location and restarts it using `state->iter.submsg_desc` and `state->iter.pData`.
If there is not sufficient space available, C recursion is used to allocate more from stack unless `PB_NO_RECURSION` is set.

If the callback returns `PB_WALK_OUT`, then `pb_walk()` restores previously stored iterator state.
If this was the top level, it acts like `PB_WALK_EXIT_OK`.

### pb_walk_into

Helper function for descending into a message different from the current iterator location.

    pb_walk_retval_t pb_walk_into(pb_walk_state_t *state, const pb_msgdesc_t *msgdesc, void *message)

This can be used for descending into messages outside the normal hierarchy, such as extension messages.

## Other utility functions

### pb_validate_utf8

Validates an UTF8 encoded string:

    bool pb_validate_utf8(const char *s);

|                      |                                                        |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| s                    | Pointer to beginning of a null-terminated string.
|*returns*             | True, if string is valid UTF-8, false otherwise.

The protobuf standard requires that `string` fields only contain valid
UTF-8 encoded text, while `bytes` fields can contain arbitrary data.

By default nanopb validates all strings on encoding and decoding.
This can be disabled by defining `PB_NO_VALIDATE_UTF8` build option or the
`PB_ENCODE_CTX_FLAG_NO_VALIDATE_UTF8` or `PB_DECODE_CTX_FLAG_NO_VALIDATE_UTF8` context options.

User code can call this function to validate strings in e.g. custom callbacks.
